>> A "World of
Wisdom" awaits you.
You never know who
you're going to see
or what you're going to find.
From feng shui, self
empowerment, meditation, yoga,
interviews with
leaders and teachers
in the vast human potential
field, plus special news
breaking moments, and
words of inspiration.
On the cutting edge of the
move to a more positive,
harmonious world is
the "World of Wisdom."
A variety program like you
have never seen before,
dedicated solely to the
mind-body-spirit connection.
The growth and human potential
happening all over the world
is not our destination,
but it is our journey.
Tune in and join us for
a "World of Wisdom,"
variety in a new way,
on the Wisdom Channel.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello, this is Louise Hay.
I'd like to share
some ideas with you.
First, please remember that
all teachers are merely
stepping stones on
your pathway of growth.
And this includes me.
I am not a healer, I
do not heal anyone.
I am here to help
you empower yourself
by sharing ideas with you.
I urge you to read
many books and to study
with many teachers, for no
one person or one system
can encompass it all.
Life is too vast for us
to totally comprehend.
And life itself is always
growing and expanding
and becoming more of itself.
>> This is the most powerful
seminar I have ever been
to, and I have been to many.
But this is the first
one of this kind, which
I think we need more of to
see leadership in women,
and women that can inspire
us, and the spirituality
is in there.
>> All I can say is I've come
away excited and challenged.
And I have some more
information to work on
to get my life in
a better place.
>> Right.
>> And my life is in a good
place now compared to what it
was a couple of years ago.
And it's partially because
of good people and good women
finding space to love
and care for one another.
>> I wanted to follow up on
the point you just made about
the integration of the
holistic approach to medicine
and the traditional
Western approach.
Can you explain a little
bit about your experience
with that?
>> Yes, I can.
First of all, Western
medicine is the best emergency
medical care ever
known on Planet Earth.
And holistic medicine embraces
conventional medicine,
and then adds some of the
ancient wisdom, inner guidance
wisdom that people
have always known.
So let's make a
real life scenario.
If you go in and have a
pap smear, what you're
having in conventional
Western medicine
is cells taken from
the cervix to test
for pre-cancer or
cancer, and that uses
good solid Western techniques.
However, that is
disease screening--
it is not creating
health in the cervix,
it's not preventing
anything in the cervix.
However, if at the same time
that you were doing the pap
smear you as the physician or
nurse practitioner were saying
to the patient, your
cervix looks wonderful,
then your body is getting
an affirmative message
that instantly sends chemicals
associated with hope and joy
to the body and actually
helps heal the cervix.
And then, to take the
holographic thing further,
because we're a hologram
where everything is connected
to everything else, you
would also say to the woman,
to keep your cervix
healthy it's very
important to get enough
antioxidants in your diet.
So I would recommend either
a supplement or of course,
the best is fresh fruits
and vegetables every day
organically grown if possible.
So that at that one visit, you
could be empowering the woman,
doing the best of
conventional Western medicine,
and also teaching her how
to keep the cervix healthy,
all simultaneously.
And that is holistic medicine.
So it's not one or
the other, it's both.
>> Right, and so often we're
just giving those negative
screenings or disease screening.
>> Absolutely.
Or you're told you don't
have a heart disease yet.
So in fact, a lot of Western
medicine, what I was taught
is, to do disease screening,
but wait for the inevitable,
you see?
You don't have it yet,
come back next year.
>> Right.
So what messages are we sending?
>> So what you really want to
do is let people know that they
have the ability, day to
day, with their thoughts,
with their actions, to create
health and renew their cells
daily.
>> I think you mention in
your book too that releasing
our emotions and giving
birth to ourselves,
I thought that was such
a wonderful concept.
>> Releasing the emotions,
feeling your emotions is
so important.
First of all, the emotions
are our soul's guidance system
or our inner wisdom's
guidance system.
So if you are incredibly sad,
it's telling you something.
It's saying, whatever
you're doing,
whatever you're
thinking is not really
in alignment with true joy.
But you must feel the
sadness and release it
through tears or whatever.
You can't push it down.
So often we're taught, don't
feel it, take a stiff drink,
or keep a stiff upper lip.
>> Right.
>> And keep on, keeping on.
It's what I call the
military metaphor.
And it works if you're
out in the field
and the enemy is coming.
You can't let yourself
dissolve in tears.
But sooner or later, you
must express and release
your emotions, particularly the
ones we call the negative ones,
of anger and fear and rage.
>> Oh, we never have those.
>> We've got it.
We've got to have
those and release them
because then they
don't stay in the body
and affect us adversely.
>> Exactly.
That's the thing I
find so fascinating,
that the physical
diseases may not
have to manifest if we can
deal with the emotional.
>> That's the main message.
I mean, there are
at least 15 studies
in the medical
literature that have
articulated the emotional
patterns associated
with breast disease.
Well, now if you
knew those, and you
were able to work with
transforming those, then to me
that, plus eating
your vegetables--
>> Right.
>> Is the best prevention for
breast disease that I know of.
>> Right.
>> And that's the important and
exciting part of the holistic
paradigm.
It's not just wait
for the inevitable.
>> Right,
>> Accidents are associated with
rage and anger and depression.
That's well known in
the medical literature.
Accidents don't
just happen, they're
almost attracted to people who
are in certain mental states.
So if you knew that,
you could pull over
to the side of the road, calm
down, do a little meditation,
call somebody,
don't keep driving.
>> Right.
You mentioned too about
feeling those emotions, having
a breakdown, do a breakthrough.
>> Absolutely.
And that means
sometimes for people,
especially if they
have been brought up
in families or environments that
reward emotional calmness all
the time.
We must all never let
them see you sweat.
>> Right.
>> It's how we say
it in this culture.
Sometimes then
you'll have an event
hit you in which
you'll start to cry.
And if you allow yourself
to go with those tears,
to go with those feelings,
to stay with them
for 10 minutes, 15
minutes, an hour,
you will often find
yourself weeping
tears that needed to be shed
when you were five years old.
And you will actually
cleanse your entire body.
You look younger
when you've finished
one of those situations.
But we're a little
terrified of that kind
of emotional expression
in Western culture.
>> I think it's changing.
>> It is changing.
>> Right, we're not the
sensitivity and all that.
>> And I don't mean do
this in the middle of work.
You do it when you
have a good time
and you feel safe and
protected, and it's appropriate.
>> Right.
One thing I wanted
to ask you also
is, this really expands far
beyond our physical bodies,
even in terms of
our life's purpose.
>> Yes.
>> And being on
purpose in our lives,
and how that affects our health?
>> Well, you see I believe
that each of us has a purpose,
a life's purpose, a plan
that we're here to fulfill.
Now I don't think that's
preordained from someone
outside of yourself.
You know that plan.
When you're doing
the things you love
to do, then your emotional
body, your mental body,
your physical body, your
hormones, your immune system,
your endocrine system
all work at their best.
And I think that's the message.
And now I have
talked to educators.
And one woman in particular
started a school,
and she said, it has taken me
20 years to really believe this,
but if you take children and
allow them to follow what
they're naturally
attracted to, they
will, in fact, go right for
what they are meant to do,
what brings them the most joy,
and what they are best at.
They do not need
to be controlled.
>> Right.
I know you mentioned some
examples in your books
about people who have
switched careers or gotten out
of relationships and
followed that inner guidance,
and the physical symptoms
are the diseases.
>> Absolutely.
>> Go away.
I had one patient in
particular whose mother
had died of breast cancer.
And she realized that she
was exactly the same age
that her mother had been.
And she was in a job she did
not like, and in a location
she didn't like.
And she changed everything and
realized that, in so doing,
she changed the
script in her cells.
And I think we need to look
at family history of disease.
People see that as
a sentence, and it's
really more like a script.
You can play it
any way you want,
but it isn't a sentence
that a judge gives to you.
When I have a woman
who says, well,
every woman in my family had
a hysterectomy before the age
of 40, I'll look at the
family history and say,
what about Sally
here, she didn't.
And oh, she's not
like the rest of us.
She's a black sheep.
So again, our biology, no matter
what we inherited in our genes,
is determined by
our belief system
and how we live our lives.
It is not predetermined.
We have an incorrect
non-scientific belief system
going on in society
now about genetics.
Identical twins
are not identical.
They have identical DNA.
They do not have identical
diseases or potentials at all.
And if they don't,
certainly if you
have a family history of
breast cancer or heart disease,
you don't need to follow
that script either.
>> And so many of those
statistics get ingrained
in us-- one in nine.
>> Yes, they do.
>> Especially with
family histories.
I know in your work with Women
to Women, your center in Maine,
you do an extensive form.
And I was reading that.
It's not just the
family, it's how
do you feel when
this is going on,
and lifestyle
things, and emotions.
>> Right.
And what happens when a
patient feels that out,
there's a lot of ding.
>> Aha.
>> Little bells go off
because she realizes, oh yeah.
And taking the time to
really look at your life,
to write in a journal, to
fill out a questionnaire,
to do the Myers-Briggs,
whatever it is,
taking the time to have
introspective relationship
with yourself in that way.
>> Quiet the mind.
>> Quiet begins to
change the pattern.
And I think that's
the exciting part.
You don't have to wait
around, you can do it today.
Or if tonight
you're feeling low,
one of the things I
do when I get my mind,
I call it gerbil
wheel in the brain--
goes around and around and
around in a negative pattern.
>> That's right.
>> Sometimes just going
to a funny movie is all
that's needed to
get me out of that.
>> And it doesn't
really take a long time.
It's not as if we have to set
aside half a day or a weekend.
Just a break, just
whatever works for us.
>> You can do it in a minute.
You can do it through
breathing fully
through your nose,
which gives you
an automatic physiologic
breath where you aerate
the bottoms of your lungs.
Just breathing in through your
nose and out through your nose
three times will
change the brainwaves
and change the immunity.
>> See, I think that's
something we don't always get.
We think it needs to be a
massive effort, and set aside.
>> That's how we're
trained in this culture.
We're trained in an
emergency mentality.
Just watch "ER."
I mean, the show is fabulous
because it's so accurate.
And what that show
does that I really love
is it shows you that all the
medicine in the world, all
of the surgical
skill in the world
does not impact the lives
of those people that
lead up to that emergency,
that it can't that.
>> Exactly.
I remember in your
book you said you never
felt comfortable saying the
gallbladder in trauma 3,
or whatever it might be.
That's a person,
that's a whole set of--
>> It's a whole
volume of knowledge.
Every time a person
comes in, it's
a whole volume of knowledge.
We're taught to take
our bodies to doctors
when there's a problem.
And I think some
of that is good.
A lot of that though
is an overstatement.
With managed care and so on,
now the average doctor spending
10, 15 minutes with a patient.
You know yourself so much
better than any professional can
know you in 15 minutes.
So if you take the
time to know yourself,
if you take the
time to know what
you can do to change
your body, then you
can use medical care
very selectively.
You can keep your
bills way down.
>> That's Encouraging.
Do you have any tips
for us on creating
that doctor-patient
relationship and going
in as an advocate
of our own bodies
and having the medical
practitioner respect that?
>> Yes, first of all, it's very
helpful to find a physician
who's philosophically
aligned with you.
So you can call
beforehand and say,
look, I'm a big believer
in natural medicine,
whenever possible.
And then you just
say to the staff,
is this doctor
interested in that.
Now I'll tell you
a biggie, and that
is if the doctor or
the nurse practitioner
or whoever practices this
in his or her own life--
that's going to be
your biggest tip.
Or they had a
personal experience
with a family member or
a near-death experience
or something.
The American Holistic
Medical Association
keeps a directory of physicians.
Another good way, frankly,
is to go into a health food
store in your area and ask who
the simpatico practitioners are
in your area.
And you'll find out that way.
Word of mouth is the best.
I maintain a referral list
for my newsletter subscribers
when I go around the country
and I meet a simpatico doctor,
I always say, give me your
card, I want your name.
>> Right
>> Now I want to know
who's doing the work,
because I agree with you.
It's one thing to follow these
principles in your own life.
It's quite another
and wonderful thing
to have a partnership
with a practitioner who
understands good solid
medicine and also
knows how to add these other
things, and who can say to you,
OK, I'll do this part, I
was trained in this part.
And then I want you to add
this stuff to your diet,
keep breathing, do
exercise, and so on,
and we'll have this
partnership relationship.
>> I think that is so vital.
And I know for our
audience that's
going to be so helpful in
just creating our own health.
Just switching gears
a little bit too.
I found something interesting
in your book about our life's
energy and our attitudes toward
money and just that whole thing
and how it can affect
our emotions and being.
Can you talk about
that a little?
>> Well, here's the thing.
If people were to define
the word money, what
we learned from the
time we were little kids
is there's not enough.
>> Right.
>> All right.
So it creates this feeling
that there can never be enough.
And even in people who
have a whole lot of money,
there's still a feeling
often that it's not enough.
We need to think in terms
of the term abundance.
And what I have found
with many patients
and with myself is the more
I'm focused on abundance
in my life, what's working,
the amount of time I have,
what I love, the
friends and so on,
and as my self-worth improves,
then my income improves.
And this has happened
for hundreds of people.
There's a wonderful
book out called
"Your Money Or Your Life," by
Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin.
>> Right.
>> And what they have done is
create a formula whereby you
assign a dollar amount to each
hour of your life's energy
after determining how many
more hours you have to live
in your life.
And once you have
made a dollar amount,
then you begin to realize that
your life energy is the most
important thing you have.
And when you follow their
program, it's only one
of many, what happens
is people's expenses
tend to decrease by 30%.
>> Is that right?
>> Within a month or two, yes.
Because they begin to focus
on what's really important.
Now you don't need to live
so frugally that you're
counting every penny.
>> Right.
>> But what you need to do
when you are going to work,
you need to say, if I
had six months to live,
would I stay in this job.
I was recently in
Idaho and there
was a bus driver who just
won the Idaho State Lottery,
won a lot of money.
And what he said--
I was told this by
the staff-- was,
this is the best job
I ever had in my life,
there is no way I'm stopping.
I love it.
>> All right.
>> If you--
>> Is there a connection
there with his--
>> I think so.
>> Prosperity.
>> I think that he opened up
the channels to prosperity
in winning the lottery just
because he already felt that
abundance.
>> Right.
>> And that's what we
need to feel every day.
And that's focusing
on what's working
and what we do mostly
in this culture
is we spend a great deal of
time on what's not working.
If you listen to the
news every night,
it's as though they have
scouts out all over the planet.
And they have to bring in all
the bad news for the planet
to your living room every night.
And if there is none
in your neighborhood,
you've got to go across
the seas to find it.
Physiologically, we're
not set up for that.
So one of my
creating health tips
is be very careful about
what you let into your living
room on television.
And that certainly includes
the media, the news.
>> Exactly.
>> Particularly the news.
>> Can you tell us in closing
here a little bit about
your Women to Women Clinic in
New England and how we can--
>> Women to Women is a
center in Yarmouth, Maine,
where women come from
all over the world.
It's about to open
a center in Israel.
We're also working on a
concept called the Meta
Resorts in Anguilla
where people can
go to get a complete
creating health profile.
In other words, go
to a beautiful space
and get blood work
and tests and so on,
but the ones that will help
them start now to create health.
So that's the Women to Women
Center and outreach programs.
Then I have a newsletter called
"Health Wisdom for Women"
published by Philips
Publishing International.
It's a monthly newsletter.
It's actionable
information you can
use right now to make your
life healthier regardless
of your starting point.
And then I've got I wrote the
book, "Women's Bodies, Women's
Wisdom," which I'm currently
in the middle of revising.
>> It's wonderful.
Well, we'll give our
viewers and our audience
here information on how to
get more information from you
and on the subject and
numbers to call and such.
Are there any other
points you'd like
to make while we're here
just on your whole area,
your whole sphere of work?
>> Well, right now I'm currently
writing another book on mothers
and daughters because I can't
think of a better way for women
to promote health than to
start with their own bodies,
their own babies,
their own daughters.
And I think what we
teach to our daughters
becomes their
emotional inheritance,
that which is passed down
through the maternal line.
And that sets the stage
for health or illness.
And of course,
women are the ones
who make most of the
doctor's appointments,
go to 75% of
doctor's visits, are
the ones making the health care
decisions for their families.
So when a woman gets
healthy, her whole family
gets healthy usually,
and I think ultimately
her whole community.
And even the planet benefits.
>> Great.
And your opinion too is
that our culture and society
is starting to accept more
of the alternative healing,
the holistic approach, integrate
it with Western medicine.
>> Yes, absolutely.
Everywhere I go, doctors are
more and more interested in.
Let me just say, if your
doctor isn't interested,
just understand that
there are many who are.
Don't give it too
much attention,
don't push up against
what isn't working.
This is a major revolution
currently in health care.
And people are waking up
and smelling the coffee
all over the place.
>> Right.
>> And that's very exciting.
>> Well, thank you for spreading
the message and being with us
here today.
And we'll look forward
to your new book
and continuing to learn.
>> Great.
Thank you.
>> Thanks.
>> All right.
[MUSIC PLAYING]